The logarithm or the log function or the log transform is really important in machine learning and in
optimization.
It's used all the time in optimization and therefore also in deep learning, because deep learning is
essentially just an optimization problem.
Now, a few videos ago I introduced you to the natural exponent.
Just as a quick reminder, the natural exponent is this constant.
It's a number around 2.7.
And when you generate a plot of of e so the natural exponent e to the x, then you find that it is strictly
a positive function.
So it's never it never takes on negative values even when x is negative.
And it has this kind of bend here and then it quickly goes up to infinity.
So this is the plot of E to the x.
Now it turns out that the natural log is the inverse of the natural exponent.
So here again this blue line is our plot of e to the x, the same exact function as the previous slide.
Here in this cyan line, I am plotting the log of e to the x, and so because the natural log and the
natural exponent are inverses of each other, these two functions actually cancel.
And what we are left with is just x.
So you see this is just a line.
This cyan line.
This is just a straight line with a slope of one.
This is the unity function.
We're just plotting this line by itself.
Now to be clear, this is not a rigorous mathematical proof that log n and e are inverses of each other.
But this is a nice illustration of that fact.
Here is what the logarithm looks like plotted on its own.
So here we have x and here is the log of x.
So it bends just like e just like the natural exponent.
But it bends the other way.
And the log actually also still grows up to infinity eventually.
But you can see it gets to infinity much much slower.
It's slowing down the larger X gets.
Now there's a couple of things I would like to point out about the logarithm.
First of all, the log is a monotonic function of x.
What does that mean for a function to be monotonic?
It means that whenever x goes up, the log also goes up, and when x goes down, the log goes down.
So they are monotonic functions.
They both go up and down together.
Now the spacing between individual points is different because log is non-linear.
I'll get to that in a moment.
But you can contrast this monotonic function with something like the sine which is a non-monotonic function.
So when x increases here the function increases but then it decreases, then it increases and so on.
So why do we care?
Who cares if this is a if log is a monotonic function of x?
Well this turns out to be important for optimization and for deep learning, because it means that minimizing
X is the same thing as minimizing the log of x.
That is to say, any tweaks we do to the model, any way that we change our deep learning model that
minimizes X, that makes X smaller.
That's also going to make the log of x smaller.
And that is what's special about a monotonic function in the context of optimization and deep learning.
Now this is actually only true for um positive values of x, because the log is not defined for zero
or any negative values of x.
So log is only defined for for values of x that are larger than zero okay.
And the key point of the logarithm is that it stretches out small values of x.
So what does this mean.
Notice here that the gap on the y axis of log of x between these two successive data points is huge.
This is a really large distance here versus the distance on the y axis that's covered by this distance
here.
So on the x axis, every point here on this function is exactly equally distant.
So these two points are equidistant on the x axis.
These two points are equidistant on the x axis.
So when projecting this function down to the x axis, all of these points are exactly equally spaced,
but they are not exactly equally spaced on the y axis.
And the closer we get to zero, the bigger the distance is on the y axis in log space.
Now this is important because it means that the logarithm better distinguishes small numbers that are
closely spaced to each other.
And the reason why that is important is because in deep learning we are often minimizing very, very
small quantities, probability values, and loss values that are small and very close to zero.
So minimizing the log turns out to be computationally easier than Then minimizing the original, let's
say, probability values.
That's purely about numerical precision.
When you have tiny, tiny probability values that are really close to each other, computers are just
going to have a hard time working with those really small numbers that are close together.
But if you take the log of those numbers, you can see now, you know, these are almost like one and
a half units apart from each other.
So far I've been talking about the natural log.
It turns out that logs have different bases.
There's the natural log, which is often written out.
Then there's log base two.
Log base ten.
This is actually log base E.
So there's different bases you can have for logs.
They are all basically the same.
They're all monotonic functions of x.
They all stretch out at very small values of x close to zero.
They're all defined only for positive values and so on.
They only differ in their slope.
So there isn't really much of a practical difference between minimizing the natural log versus log base
two versus log base ten or any other base.
That said, natural Log is the most commonly used base because of its relationship to E.
That fits in nicely with using sigmoid functions and softmax functions.
Okay, so again, this is actually not a reminder because I already mentioned this a few slides ago.
Machine learning and deep learning often involve minimizing very small quantities like probabilities.
And yeah, you can get some precision errors when working with very small numbers.
So the idea is that we just stretch out those numbers and that just makes the the optimization code
work better.
Now we are going to switch to Python.
And I'll just introduce you to working with the natural log in Python.
So here we have a set of points to evaluate the log on.
So I'm going to compute the log of 200 linearly spaced numbers that are separated between .0001 and
one okay.
And then we we plot them okay.
And then this I showed in the previous video.
How to change the font size of a figure.
Okay, so not, you know, not super interesting.
This is really just demonstrating what I already showed you in the slides.
Okay.
And here is also a demonstration of the natural log and the natural exponents being inverses of each
other.
So here I compute log x and the x and e to the x.
And then I'm plotting the natural exponent of the log of x and the log of the natural exponent of the
of x.
So these two should cancel out.
These two should cancel out.
And that should be the same as plotting x by x.
So then we can just visualize this.
So again the line is unity.
This is x by x.
And then we are plotting e of log of x and log of e to the x.
In this video you learned about the log function.
Why?
It is used in optimization and in particular in deep learning and how to compute the natural log in
numpy.